Contracts chapter (#21)
stlab/better-code: better-code/src/chapter-2-contracts.md

# Contracts

> Contracts are the connective tissue of solid software.  You really

Author: ```suggestion
Contracts are the connective tissue of healthy software.  You really
```

can't build software at scale without them.  If you *are* successfully
building large software systems, you're already using  contracts in

> some form, and this chapter should help you make them more powerful.

Author: I'll come back to this, thanks.

> some form, and this chapter should help you make them more powerful.

Author: I know lots of people recommend doing this sort of thing, but I loathe these "here's what we're about to do” “Slides”, so I find them very hard to write.  I'm also having trouble with the ending; thinking of cutting it.  It would be a big help if there were some specific suggested language.

> some form, and this chapter should help you make them more powerful.

Author: ugh.  OK.

## In pursuit of Correctness

Fundamentally, contracts are about the first ingredient of Better

> Code: correctness. Some folks write off the pursuit of correctness,
> because bugs are inevitable, and in practice, and we rely on incorrect
> software every day without disaster (for the most part). But that
> approach throws out the baby with the bathwater.  There is a practical

Author: ```suggestion
Code: correctness. It's popular in some circles to scoff at the idea of correct software,
on the grounds that bugs are inevitable, and _for the most part_, we rely on incorrect
software every day without disaster.  But there is a practical
```

the British computer scientist and logician Tony Hoare.  While we
won't be using Hoare Logic directly, we'll discuss it briefly to
provide historical context, and because it is the source of crucial
terminology.

### Preconditions and Postconditions

Hoare used this notation, called a “Hoare triple,”

> {P}S{Q}

which is an assertion that if **precondition** *P* is met, operation
*S* establishes **postcondition** *Q*.

For example:

- if we start with `x == 2` (precondition), after `x += 1`, `x == 3` (postcondition):

  > {x == 2}x+=1{x == 3}

- if `x` is less than the maximum integer (precondition), after `x
  += 1`, `x` is greater than the minimum integer (postcondition):

  > {x < Int.max}x+=1{x > Int.min}

What makes preconditions and postconditions useful for formal proofs
is this composition rule:

> {P}S{Q} ∧ {Q}T{R} ⇒ {P}S;T{R}

Given two valid Hoare triples, if the postconditions of the first are
preconditions of the second, we can form a new valid triple describing
the effects of performing the operations in sequence.  The notation
may look exotic, but its meaning should be familiar: this rule simply
captures the reasoning we use to think informally about statements

> when we write straight-line code.

Author: ```suggestion
when we write one statement after the next.
```

the first step.  Contracts tell us which code needs fixing:

- If preconditions aren't satisifed, that's a bug in the caller.  The
  function is not required to make any promises[^no-promises] in that case.

- If preconditions are statisfied but postconditions are not
  fulfilled, that's a bug in the callee, or in something it calls.

[^no-promises]: In fact, a function *shouldn't* make any promises in
  case of precondition violation, because then the caller has a right
  to call the function and expect the promised result: it's no longer
  a precondition violation.  There is one exception, especially in a
  safe-by-default language like Swift: all functions not explicitly
  labeled unsafe implicitly promise not to have arbitrary “undefined
  behavior” when their preconditions are violated.  But that's a
  blanket guarantee that you don't spell out in contracts.

And if you ever find yourself with something that's clearly a bug but
you can't decide which code to blame, that's a sign that a contract is
missing or incomplete.  A system that exposes these situations, where
everybody is playing by the rules but things still go wrong, is known

> by the technical term “footgun.”

Author: @camio please either resolve the conversation or add something; thanks.

> by the technical term “footgun.”

Author: > Your argument rests on the premise that the contract is the infallible source of truth
No it does not.

After step 1 the function has a bug.  That is objectively true.  When I wrote that contracts tell you which code needs fixing, I didn't mean they do so in isolation; it's in the context of the implementation.  Maybe I shouldn't have used the word "code."  I could have said contacts tell you whether the caller or callee needs fixing.  Would that satisfy you?

> by the technical term “footgun.”

Author: I'm going to cover this scenario in a section on contract evolution, describing it as a way you can break the ability of contracts to tell us what code needs to be changed.  I'm also going to rephrase "contracts tell us which code needs fixing" as "contracts tell us where bugs are.” That is objectively true: if you change a function and its documentation in a way that breaks all clients, they all have bugs now and the the function is not buggy.  But it still needs to be fixed.

> by the technical term “footgun.”

Author: I disagree.  It's a judgement you can make about a piece of code without regard to context or the history of the project.  It's not the whole picture, but it's a judgement you can make by reasoning locally.  Small accessible steps are valuable.  Also, even though you can come up with a scenario where it doesn't indicate what needs to be changed, in practice there's a very strong correlation.  If you look at what has a bug and suddenly all 5 clients of a particular function are buggy, you have a strong indication that you want to look at the history of that function.

> by the technical term “footgun.”

Reviewer: > in practice there's a very strong correlation

I agree. So instead of "contract tell us where the bugs are", say "contracts give us a good signal of where the bugs are".

```swift
/// A series of `(X, Y)` pairs.
struct PairArray<X, Y> {
  // Invariant: `xs.count == ys.count`

  /// The first part of each element.
  private var xs: [X] = []

  /// The second part of each element.
  private var ys: [Y] = []

  /// An empty instance.
  public init() {}

  /// The `i`th element.
  public subscript(i: Int) -> (X, Y) {
    (xs[i], ys[i])
  }

  /// The length.
  public var count: Int { ys.count }

  /// Adds `e` to the end.
  public mutating func append(_ e: (X, Y)) {
    xs.append(e.0)
    ys.append(e.1)
  }
}
```

The invariant for this type is that the private arrays have the same
length.  It's important to remember that invariants only hold at a
type's public interface boundary and are routinely violated,
temporarily, durign a mutation.  For example, in `append`, we have to
grow one of the arrays first, which breaks the invariant until we've
done the other push_back.  That's not a problem because the arrays are
private—that “bad” state is *encapsulated* by the type, and
invisible to clients.  By the time we return from `append`, everything
is back in order.

Because we can control access to the visibility of “bad” states, it

> doesn't take much attention to uphold a type invariant.  You

Author: The exception case is handled by the 3rd bullet, even if you have the wrong rule (Better Code say invariants need not be upheld when a mutation fails, but that is a topic for the errors chapter which comes next). 

You're right that it's more than “upon exit,” though.  I'll make a change to that effect.

- make stored properties `private` or `private(set)`
- establish the invariant in the type's `init` method(s), and
- ensure that every `mutating` method upholds the condition upon exit.

Non-mutating operations can't disturb the invariant, and any mutating

> operations that only use the type's public API trivially upholds the

Author: ```suggestion
operation that only uses the type's public API trivially upholds the
```

invariant.

#### How To Choose a Type Invariant

Often, you have a choice about how strong to make your type's
invariant.  For example, in `PairArray`, we could have chosen the
invariant `x.count <= y.s.count`.  We call that a *weaker* invariant
because it allows many more internal states.

Let's assume that there's some method that can create a condition
where `x.count < y.count`:

```swift
  /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
  ///
  /// - Precondition: `xs.count <= ys.count`.
  init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) { (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys) }
```

[Note: when sequences of unequal length are `zip`ped, the result

> has the length of the shorter sequence.]

Author: :shrug: Maybe not as much as `map`, but more than `CollectionOf1`; it's a basic part of the standard library.

principle it could be many more. Maintaining a stronger invariant
is better.  There are two simple approaches:

- We can strengthen the precondition of the new `init` method:

  ```swift
    /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
    ///
    /// - Precondition: `xs.count == ys.count`.
    init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) { (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys) }
  ```

- Or we can lift the precondition entirely and normalize the internal
  representation upon construction:

  ```swift
    /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
    init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) {
      (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys)
      let l = Swift.min(xs.count, ys.count)
      self.xs.removeRange(l...)
      self.ys.removeRange(l...)
    }
  ```

The latter approach is better, as it results in a simpler and
less-fragile public API.

### It's Documentation

Looking back at Meyers' definition, you might notice he says contracts
are “precisely defined specifications,” which is just a fancy word for
documentation. Like it or not, if you're going to be in the
correctness game, you need documentation.  Undocumented software is
neither correct nor incorrect; it does something, but does it do the

> *right* thing?  There's no way to know.

Author: It's a rhetorical question and unless you have some other suggestion I have no idea what to do with your critique.

> *right* thing?  There's no way to know.

Author: Sorry, I don't believe it's the least bit ambiguous in this context.  We're clearly talking about correctness.

> *right* thing?  There's no way to know.

Reviewer: The most important thing is that the reader isn't confused. I found the phrasing momentarily confusing, though I may be an exception. I suggest getting another take or two to be certain, and then make the final call.

> *right* thing?  There's no way to know.

Author: @sean-parent, @nickpdemarco What's your read on this question?

> *right* thing?  There's no way to know.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @dabrahams - I think it's clear we're talking about correctness here. At most we might put a footnote clarifying the distinction between utility and correctness, but I don't think that's necessary.

interacts with, and will have effects throughout the codebase.  The
implementation of the API had better be an expression of the contract,
but deficiencies in the implementation of a function can only do local
damage.

### A Tower of Invariants

The tower of abstraction mentioned earlier comes with a tower of
invariants.  The invariants of `PairArray` are built on—and depend
on—the invariants of the individual arrays. We can embed `PairArray`
into some larger data structure with its own invariant.

In fact, you can think of the entire state of your program as one big
data structure with its own invariants, and formalize what it means
for the program to “be in a good state” that way.  For example, you
might have a database of employees, each of which has its own ID, and
which also stores the ID of the employee's manager.

It's an invariant of your program that a manager ID can't just be
random; it has to identify an employee that's in the database—that's
part of what it means for the program to be in a good state, and all
through the program you have code to ensure that invariant is upheld.
It would be a great idea to identify and document that whole-program

> invariant.

Author: ? I'm about to tell you in the next paragraph.

#### Encapsulating invariants

An even better idea is to use *encapsulate* the invariant in a type,
and document _that_.  So instead of using an `SQLDatabase` type
directly, you could create an `EmployeeDatabase` type with a private
`SQLDatabase`, whose public API always upholds that invariant.  Now
you can remove the invariant-upholding logic from the rest of your
code.  This is one of the most powerful code transformations you can
make.

```swift
/// The employees of a company.
///

> /// Invariant: every employee has a manager in the database.

Author: No I do not want to say anything about cycles.  I used to have a remark that the CEO gets to be their own manager but I took it out.

> /// Invariant: every employee has a manager in the database.

Reviewer: FWIW, I was distracted by this design. I'd want to see tighter invariants for a real-world example. Without that, this example seems artificial.

> /// Invariant: every employee has a manager in the database.

Author: @camio I'm going to resolve this because I don't know what else to do.  Feel free to unresolve and pull in our colleagues for backup if you disagree.

### Why Use Doc Comments
Lastly, I want to say, this documentation
should go in your code as comments, because:

1. That puts the two things that should correspond—documentation and
   implementation—next to one another, so you can see when they don't
   match up. People sometimes complain that docs go out of date, but
   that's kinda the point: without the ability to see that
   inconsistency, there's no way to know that there's a bug.

2. Using comments makes it reasonable to combine the activities of
   coding and documentation, which—believe it or not—are mutually
   supportive.

### Making It Tractable

If we're going to integrate documentation into our programming so
tightly, we need to make sure it's neither intrusive for the
maintainer to read nor burdensome for the author to write.  Ideally,
it should help both of them.

Now, not every contract is as simple as the ones we've shown so far,
but simplicity is a goal.  In fact, if you can't write a terse,
simple, but _complete_ contract for a component, there's a good chance
it's badly designed.  A classic example is the C library `realloc`
function, which does at least three different things, all of which

> need to be described. A better design would have separated these

Author: I don't really want to use `realloc`; I'm still searching for good examples.

functions.  So simple contracts are both easy to digest and easy to
write.

Let's look at another example. The methodology we'll be following here is based on the [Swift API
Design
Guidelines](https://www.swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/),
only slightly modified.

```swift
/// A resizable random-access collection of `T`s.
struct DynamicArray<T> {

  /// Removes and returns the last element.
  public mutating func popLast() -> T { ... }

  /// The `i`th element.
  public subscript(i: Int) -> T { ... }

  /// The length.
  public var length: Int { ... }
    .
    .
    .

  /// The number of elements that can be stored before storage is
  /// reallocated.
  private var capacity: Int { ... }
}
```

The method bodies are collapsed, because contracts are not about what
you put in your implementations.  Contracts are part of your

> function's interface.

Reviewer: I think everything said here is obvious based on what is said prior so felt it redundant. I don't feel strongly about this.

> function's interface.

Author: I don't either, but it's not obvious to me that it's obvious.  @sean-parent any opinion?

> function's interface.

Author: @nickpdemarco thoughts?

> function's interface.

Author: It isn't, as [I said](https://github.com/stlab/better-code/pull/21/files#r2237885728).  So where should I make it, @nickpdemarco ?

> function's interface.

Author: @sean-parent , @nickpdemarco Can I get a suggestion of where, please?!

can't remove and return the last element if there's no last element,
right?

Whether or not to omit an implied precondition may be a slightly
different judgement from the others, because it's information every
client needs in order to use the function correctly. We recommend
omitting explicit documentation of any implied precondition unless
it's quite subtle.  With that policy, a client must assume that
anything required for the summary to make sense is a precondition.  In
this case it's not subtle that having a last element is required if
you are going to remove the last element, so the original declaration
should be sufficient:

```swift
  /// Removes and returns the last element.
 public mutating func popLast() -> T { ... }
```

In practice, once you are comfortable with this discipline, the
thought process behind writing this documentation is straightforward;
it need not take more than a few seconds:

- Write a summary.
- If it doesn't completely describe the postconditions
   1. Try to make it do so, or if that is just too awkward,
   2. add a postcondition clause.
- If there are any preconditions not straightforwardly implied by the
  summary, add a precondition clause.

> ### A More Complicated Example

Reviewer: In this section, you're starting with an example and then improving it. As a reader, it would've been great to have had this context. I saw all kinds of problems with your initial version, thinking that I needed to set you straight. Not the effect you were going for I presume :-D

Author: **Sean and I just discovered that this thing has a name after all!**  It is a [total preorder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_ordering#Total_preorders).  I was trying to prove to myself that there were always bidirectional arcs between any two members of an equivalence class.  The strong connectedness property of total preorders implies there is an arc in at least one direction… but as far as I can tell if you leave the other direction out, the target element is in a different  equivalence class.  You'd rearrange the elements graphically to show that, but it's topologically the same.

```swift
extension DynamicArray {
  /// Sorts the elements so that `areInIncreasingOrder(self[i+1],
  /// self[i])` is false for each `i` in `0 ..< length - 2`.
  ///
  /// - Precondition: `areInIncreasingOrder` is a strict weak ordering
  ///   over the elements of `self`.
  /// - Complexity: at most N log N comparisons, where N is the number of elements.
  mutating func sort<T>(areInIncreasingOrder: (T, T)->Bool) { ... }
}

var a = [7, 9, 2, 7]
a.sort(areInIncreasingOrder: <)
print(a)     // prints [2, 7, 7, 9]
```

This method sorts the elements according to some comparison predicate
`areInIncreasingOrder`.  So if we pass it the less-than operator,
which is true when the first argument is less than the second, we get
the elements arranged from least to greatest. The contract gives an
explicit precondition that isn't implied by the summary: it requires
that the predicate be a strict weak ordering.

> Note that _some_ precondition on the predicate is be needed just to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that _some_ precondition on the predicate is needed just to
```

though: sorting functions taking strict weak orderings are
traditional. One has to weigh the risk of users reflexively writing
`sort(areInOrder: <)`—against the value of these simplifications.  The
argument label helps a bit, because *if* you happen to consider the
equal elements case, you will see they clearly `areInOrder` but and
realize `<` will return false.  But if you don't happen to consider
that case, you won't get the sort you expected… sometimes.  Whether to
break with precedent in order to get a simpler API with a clearer
contract is an engineering decision you will have to make. To reduce
the risk you could add this assertion, which will fire if the ordering
is strict-weak:

```
assert(
  self.isEmpty || areInOrder(first!, first!),
  "Partial ordering required; did you pass a strict-weak ordering?")
```

### Project-Wide Documentation Policies

The only reason you haven't seen
complexity documented in this talk up to now is that I have a policy
that operations have constant complexity unless specifically
documented otherwise.

Which brings me to this aside…  A big part of making the documentation
problem tractable is having some well-chosen project-wide policies

> that save you from repeating common patterns. So I'm not going to

Reviewer: You use "So" a lot in this chapter. I suggest using variations or omitting it so it doesn't stand out so much.

prescribe your project's policy about this, but you should choose one,
and write it down somewhere.  Your project's choice of policy can make
the difference between documentation being useful and being burdensome
or inconsistent (at which point people will just stop reading and
writing it).

For example,

- Every declaration outside a function body must have a documentation comment that describes
  its contract.
  - Start with a summary sentence fragment.
    - Describe what a function or method does and what it returns.
    - Describe what a property or type is.
    - Separate the fragment from any additional documentation with a blank line and end it
      with a period.
  - Preconditions, postconditions and invariants obviously implied by the summary need not
    be explicitly documented.
  - Declarations that fulfill protocol requirements are exempted when
    nothing useful can be added to the documentation of the protocol
    requirement itself.

> - End every file with a newline.

Reviewer: I don't think this is a good example. This kind of thing should be automatically handled by editor and pre-commit tooling so developers don't concern themselves with it.

> - Do not strip trailing whitespace from lines you're not editing; it creates spurious VC diffs.

Reviewer: I don't think this is a good example either. Good practice would have trailing whitespace nonexistent in a repository and tooling should enforce it without developers having to do anything about it.

- Document the performance of every operation that doesn't execute in constant time and space.

It is reasonable to put information in the policies without which the
project's other documentation would be incomplete or confusing, but
you should be aware that it implies policies must be read.

> I want to mention one other thing: everything you see in these

Reviewer: > I want...

The first person tense in a book comes across as overly informal for a text like this.

Author: I'm converting a talk to a book chapter and haven't gotten this far yet.  The latest commit always says how far I've gotten.

function signatures is implicitly part of the function's contract. For
example, the signature if `sort` says the predicate must operate on
arguments of type T, and return a `Bool`, so we didn't have to spell

> that out as a precondition in documentation.

Reviewer: By consequence, the function's name is also implicitly part of the function's contract. I think this warrants further discussion, especially how it can facilitate omitting additional needless words.

Consider, for example, a function called "length()" on a container.

Reviewer: If names can be incorrect, then they can be communicating information redundant with the contract documentation.

Consider Swift's Array.contains function:

```
func contains(Self.Element) -> Bool

Returns a Boolean value indicating whether the sequence contains the given element.
```

The contract is entirely implied by the name and signature of the function and, therefore, redundant.

Why are we okay with this redundancy when it occurs?

Author: > Why use two different wordings for the same thing

It is intentional.  When you use exactly the same wording, the documentation very often seems tautological, and saying a thing two different ways helps a reader be sure they understand what's being said.  Implementation, documentation, tests (and I guess name, too):  the idea is to say a thing different ways so you can validate one against the other.  Redundancy is necessary.

programming at scale: because we can't keep the whole program in our
heads, we do what humans always do when faced with complexity: we
break complicated problems into parts that can be understood in
isolation.

## Hoare Logic

Programming by contract grew out of Hoare Logic, developed in 1969 by
the British computer scientist and logician Tony Hoare.  While we
won't be using Hoare Logic directly, we'll discuss it briefly to
provide historical context, and because it is the source of crucial
terminology.

### Preconditions and Postconditions

Hoare used this notation, called a “Hoare triple,”

> {P}S{Q}

which is an assertion that if **precondition** *P* is met, operation
*S* establishes **postcondition** *Q*.

For example:

- if we start with `x == 2` (precondition), after `x += 1`, `x == 3` (postcondition):

  > {x == 2}x+=1{x == 3}

- if `x` is less than the maximum integer (precondition), after `x
  += 1`, `x` is greater than the minimum integer (postcondition):

  > {x < Int.max}x+=1{x > Int.min}

What makes preconditions and postconditions useful for formal proofs
is this composition rule:

> {P}S{Q} ∧ {Q}T{R} ⇒ {P}S;T{R}

> 

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if I forgot to make this comment or if it was lost or resolved (a problem with too long a review period!). But what allows us to use the composition rule in practice is the consequence rule that allows us to strengthen preconditions and weaken postconditions so we can get a matching `{Q}` to compose.

Author: I don't think you need any special rules for that., and I don't think we want to mention it.  First, IIUC preconditions and postconditions in Hoare triples are not given by the operation—the triple is simply valid or invalid—so there's nothing to strengthen or weaken.  Furthermore, even if that were wrong, the normal rules of logic work. A weaker statement is implied by a stronger statement, and you can use that to draw conclusions about a triple's validity.

Given two valid Hoare triples, if the postconditions of the first are
preconditions of the second, we can form a new valid triple describing
the effects of performing the operations in sequence.  The notation
may look exotic, but its meaning should be familiar: this rule simply
captures the reasoning we use to think informally about statements
when we write one statement after the next.

### Invariants

Not all code runs in a straight line, though, so Hoare also gave us a

> tool for reasoning about loops.

Reviewer 3: We should state the While rule formally. You may want to mention the While rule for total correctness as well. The formalization is long, introducing the idea of a loop variant _t_ that is strictly decreasing with a finite domain. to prove termination. Then we would just be missing the Conditional rule to cover Hoare completely. If this is getting to be too much, we could mention that we will cover these in more detail in the Algorithm chapter (which might be a better place).

Author: I am dubious that we want to get into the While rule for total correctness at all.  The book is supposed to be small-ish and practical. The details of Hoare logic are much less powerful for everyday programming than DbC is and it's mostly introduced here to show that the formal reasoning one does with Hoare is on the continuum with normal activities.  The conditional rule is pretty obvious and I don't think a complete coverage of Hoare is going to benefit our readers, and might well turn lots of people off. I do think loop invariants are especially important for algorithms, and I figured you'd cover that in the algorithms chapter, since loops are so central.

Author: @sean-parent I'd like to resolve this; do we need to debate this point?

Reviewer: > I don't think a complete coverage of Hoare is going to benefit our readers, and might well turn lots of people off

I agree with this. I presume there are more specialized works available that can be referenced for folks who are interested in a deeper treatment. I'm concerned that every time we introduce a formalism, we lose readers that would otherwise benefit from the rest of this chapter.

> A **loop invariant** is a condition that holds before and after each

Reviewer 3: Usually, this is phrased as "before entering the loop and after each iteration (including the last)".

Author: @sean-parent bump?

    leverage SIMD operations.

```swift
/// A series of `(X, Y)` pairs.
struct PairArray<X, Y> {
  // Invariant: `xs.count == ys.count`

  /// The first part of each element.
  private var xs: [X] = []

  /// The second part of each element.
  private var ys: [Y] = []

  /// An empty instance.
  public init() {}

  /// The `i`th element.
  public subscript(i: Int) -> (X, Y) {
    (xs[i], ys[i])
  }

  /// The length.
  public var count: Int { ys.count }

  /// Adds `e` to the end.
  public mutating func append(_ e: (X, Y)) {
    xs.append(e.0)
    ys.append(e.1)
  }
}
```

The invariant for this type is that the private arrays have the same
length.  It's important to remember that invariants only hold at a
type's public interface boundary and are routinely violated,
temporarily, durign a mutation.  For example, in `append`, we have to
grow one of the arrays first, which breaks the invariant until we've
done the other push_back.  That's not a problem because the arrays are
private—that “bad” state is *encapsulated* by the type, and
invisible to clients.  By the time we return from `append`, everything
is back in order.

> Because we can control access to the visibility of “bad” states, it
> The formula for upholding a type invariant is tractable.  You

Author: ```suggestion
Because we can control access to the visibility of “bad” states, there
is a formula for upholding a type invariant.  We
```

damage.

### A Tower of Invariants

The tower of abstraction mentioned earlier comes with a tower of
invariants.  The invariants of `PairArray` are built on—and depend
on—the invariants of the individual arrays. We can embed `PairArray`
into some larger data structure with its own invariant, which will
depend on that of `PairArray`.

In fact, you can think of the entire state of your program as one big
data structure with its own invariants, and formalize what it means
for the program to “be in a good state” that way.  For example, you
might have a database of employees, each of which has its own ID, and
which also stores the ID of the employee's manager (the CEO gets to be
their own manager).

It's an invariant of your program that a manager ID can't just be
random; it has to identify an employee that's in the database—that's
part of what it means for the program to be in a good state, and all
through the program you have code to ensure that invariant is upheld.
It would be a great idea to identify and document that whole-program
invariant in some central location, so maintainers will know to uphold it, and that they

> can rely on it.

Reviewer: Continuing [this conversation](https://github.com/stlab/better-code/pull/21/files/6a7e2a18b38b4d51a3e93380bedb16cfe4838be3#r2226436603).

I understand where you're coming from, but this seems like a band-aid for poor design. This could be a useful practice for legacy systems where refactoring is costly, but I think the goal should be to design systems with local invariants.

Author: Of course, that's the whole point of the next section.  I didn't say it's the _best_ idea, that's coming in the very next sentence.  I feel like you're picking nits, taking one phrase completely out of context.

    documentation needs to say in which order the adjacent elements
    are passed to `areInOrder`. Judgement calls are part of
    engineering, and in our judgement the order of arguments is
    implied.

There are two further simplifications we can make to the
precondition. First, everything in documentation of a method happens
in the context of `self`, so we can drop “of `self`.”  This
improvement was available to us all along, and may seem trivial, but
the value of [omitting needless
words](https://thewritinghabit.blog/2016/04/04/omit-needless-words/)
adds up over lots of function definitions. It lowers the burden of
writing documentation, and makes it much easier to read. Remember,
every word a reader has to process has a cognitive cost in addition to
whatever benefits it may provide, so each one should more than pay for
itself.

Secondly, the summary has become so simple that we can embed the
precondition there without overly complicating it, making the final
declaration:

```swift
/// Sorts the elements so that all adjacent pairs satisfy the [total
///   preorder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_ordering#Total_preorders)

> /// `areInOrder`.

Reviewer: To make this contract more approachable, could we add a brief, intuitive explanation of total preorders upfront? I'm concerned that requiring developers to click through to the Wikipedia article creates a high cognitive load for understanding the 90% use case.

Adding a simple analogy, like 'For context, a total preorder can be thought of as a generalization of arithmetic's less-than-or-equal-to (≤)', would make the contract easier to use correctly, saving time and helping to prevent bugs.

of correct software, on the grounds that bugs are inevitable, and
because _for the most part_, we rely on incorrect software every day
without disaster.  But there is a practical approach to correctness
that improves both code quality and the programming experience,
without demanding unrealistic perfection.

For those who like to think formally, we can define a _semi-correct_
program as one for which there exists a valid initial state and
inputs, such that the program will generate a valid output. As an
analogy, a broken clock is semi-correct, it is correct twice a
day. This definition provides a partial ordering of correctness, where
a program is _more correct_ than another if the initial states under
which it is correct are a superset of the other.

So while you may not reach a point where all bugs vanish, you will
have well-justified confidence in the correctness of your own work
while maintaining high productivity. Also, the discipline we'll
describe here of **programming by contract** removes uncertainty and
needless complexity from your code and from the process of coding.
That's a big part of why we say it's practical.

## Reasoning about correctness

> How can you know whether your program is correct?  Validating
> correctness seldom requires an elaborate formal proof—usually the sort
> of everyday thinking that we do while programming suffices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How can you know whether your program is correct? Validating 
correctness rarely requires formal proof; everyday programming judgment suffices.
```

Author: Is the change from seldom to rarely intentional?  I will take the removal of “an elaborate,” good idea. To me “everyday programming judgement” sounds a little too forced, like it's supposed to be a technical term.  Also I think the opposition of “seldom” and “usually” is important, because it isn't “always.”  Thoughts?

Author: @nickpdemarco ping

Reviewer 2: Heard on "seldom", I don't feel strongly, I agree on the opposition with "usually".

I think "everyday thinking that we do while programming" is a bit wordy, and I just tried to crack that nut. I think my suggestion is better, but maybe not perfect.

Author: I can nix "sort of"

```suggestion
How can you know whether your program is correct?  Validating
correctness seldom requires a formal proof—the everyday thinking 
we do while programming is often enough.
```

```swift
var names = [ "Sean", "Laura", "Dave", "Crusty" ]
names.sort()
print(names[3])
```

In the example above, how do we know that last line is OK? Our thought
process is something like this:

- We started with values in indices zero through three of `names`.
- sorting `names` rearranges elements without changing the set of valid indices.
- Therefore, in the last line, `names` still has an element at index `3`.

That's just an informal proof, and we use that kind of reasoning every
time we write a line of code. So, regular programming is on the same
continuum as formally proving correctness.  We're going to explore the
power that's available by moving toward the formal end of that
spectrum to see how it enables Better Code.

## Local Reasoning

The kind of everyday thinking demonstrated above is only practical if
we can reason locally about code.  The clearest definition of Local
Reasoning we've found is [this
one](https://medium.com/@nathangitter/local-reasoning-in-swift-6782e459d)
from Nathan Gitter: “Local reasoning is the idea that the reader can
make sense of the code directly in front of them, without going on a
journey discovering how the code works.”

> So in our example, what we know about `sort` allow us to reason about

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So in our example, what we know about `sort` allows us to reason about
```

its use without looking at its implementation.  In fact, local

> reasoning is so fundamental that most of our programming best

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reasoning is so fundamental that most programming best
```

With, "our", did you mean STLab's? Or the industry's?

Author: I meant the industry's.  I think I might drop “programming” as well.

```suggestion
reasoning is so fundamental that most accepted best
```

practices exist just to support our ability to do it.  It's why we
use access control, why we break programs into components like
functions, types, and modules, and why we try to keep them small.

## Components and Abstraction

Obviously, “knowing something about `sort`” is only possible and
relevant because `sort` is a separate component with its own name. If
we had injected the sorting implementation directly into our code,
we'd have to reason about all of its details, and we'd need a comment

> to tell us that the implementation was sorting the elements.

Reviewer 2: > we'd need a comment to tell us that the implementation was sorting the elements.

Would we? That's probably true if you've already accepted the DbC ethos, but at this point in the narrative, I'm not sure we have. If we've already "reason[ed] about all of its details", would we actually need a comment to tell us what it's doing? IIUC we only need a comment to know if its behavior is correct.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I don't mean to be pedantic, but even if sorting is complicated, you've already stated we've "reason[ed] about all of its details". What does it mean to reason about all details if not to understand a (yes, complicated) piece of code? In practice I hear you that a comment would be _helpful_, but as the sentence is structured I hear a contradiction. Does that make sense?

It's a common fallacy that factoring out a component only makes
sense if it's used more than once. The real criterion is whether you
can identify a unit of *abstraction*—the third ingredient of Better
Code.  If you can think of a simple and descriptive name for
something, that's usually a good indicator that there's an abstraction
waiting to be discovered.

In fact, creating a component directly creates the opportunity for an

> additional use site: in testing.  The more code you test separately,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
additional use site: testing.  The more code you test separately,
```

Nit: I think the colon implies the rhs should be the site itself, not a prepositional phrase.

programming at scale: because we can't keep the whole program in our
heads, we do what humans always do when faced with complexity: we
break complicated problems into parts that can be understood in
isolation.

## Hoare Logic

Programming by contract grew out of Hoare Logic, developed in 1969 by
the British computer scientist and logician Tony Hoare.  While we
won't be using Hoare Logic directly, we'll discuss it briefly to
provide historical context, and because it is the source of crucial
terminology.

### Preconditions and Postconditions

Hoare used this notation, called a “Hoare triple,”

> {P}S{Q}

which is an assertion that if **precondition** *P* is met, operation
*S* establishes **postcondition** *Q*.

For example:

- if we start with `x == 2` (precondition), after `x += 1`, `x == 3` (postcondition):

  > {x == 2}x+=1{x == 3}

- if `x` is less than the maximum integer (precondition), after `x
  += 1`, `x` is greater than the minimum integer (postcondition):

  > {x < Int.max}x+=1{x > Int.min}

What makes preconditions and postconditions useful for formal proofs
is this composition rule:

> {P}S{Q} ∧ {Q}T{R} ⇒ {P}S;T{R}

> Given two valid Hoare triples, if the postconditions of the first are
> preconditions of the second, we can form a new valid triple describing

Reviewer 2: Surely, we mean,

```suggestion
Given two valid Hoare triples, if the postconditions of the first are
a superset of the preconditions of the second, we can form a new 
valid triple describing
```

Author: No, I mean what I wrote.  You could get there by saying that if {P}S{Q} ⇒ {P}S{Q'} for any Q'⊂Q, which is a subset of the [consequence rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoare_logic#Consequence_rule).  I am trying to keep the logic stuff as simple as possible and just describing the [rule of composition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoare_logic#Rule_of_composition).  As soon as you bring in the other stuff the visual complexity of the math will start overwhelming the value of its meaning for many people.

the effects of performing the operations in sequence.  The notation
may look exotic, but its meaning should be familiar: this rule simply
captures the reasoning we use to think informally about statements
when we write one statement after the next.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we need a concrete example of composition here. Maybe we can revisit the sorted names example from before.

Reviewer 2: As written, it's hard to feel confident that I understand what I need to about this new way of thinking, since it's not grounded in an old way of thinking.

Author: @nickpdemarco How does this strike you?

>    **{_a_≤_b_}**`let c = (b-a)/2`**{_c_≥ 0} ∧ {_c_≥0}**`b = a + c` **{_a_≤_b_}**
>⇒  **{_a_≤_b_}**`let c = (b-a)/2`               **;**               `b = a + c` **{_a_≤_b_}**

I can mention that this calculation is performed by a binary search and say that hoare logic demonstrates  that the property _a_≤_b_ is preserved.  I can then refer back to it as an example of invariant when I bring those up.

Author: Wow, I'm really failing to make my point.  Oh, GH's styling buttons don't do the right thing to the markdown.  Now fixed.  If that didn't help:

Take these two independent lines of code:

```swift
let c = (b - a) / 2

b = a + c
```

Now let's write a valid Hoare triple using each operation.

```swift
let c = (b - a) / 2 // pre: a <= b; post: c >= 0

b = a + c // pre: c >= 0; post: a <= b
```

In Hoare's notation that's:

 **{a_≤_b}**`let c = (b -a )/2`**{_c_≥ 0}**
 **{_c_≥0}**`b = a + c`**{a_≤_b}**
 
The fact that the precondition of the second is the postcondition of the first means that sequencing these operations can have the postcondition of the second and the precondition of the first.  That's the composition rule:

 **{a_≤_b}**`let c = (b -a )/2; b = a + c`**{a_≤_b}**
 
 That tells us that if we enter the pair of operations with the condition  **{a_≤_b}**, that condition is preserved by the pair.

Author: @nickpdemarco please see latest commit

iteration.  In this linear search there's an *invariant* that no
element preceding the `i`th one is equal to `x`.

```swift
var i = 0
while (i != a.count && a[i] != x) {
  i += 1
}
```

Knowing that's always true when the loop exits allows us to conclude
that if `i != a.count`, the *first* occurrence of `x` in `a` is at
index `i`.  Anything else would contradict the loop invariant.

Loops are difficult to reason about in general, which is
why we suggest you avoid them (see the Algorithms chapter). But when
you _do_ have a loop, identifying its invariant is often the first
step in understanding what it does.

## Design By Contract

> *…a software system is viewed as a set of communicating components
> whose interaction is based on precisely defined specifications of
> the mutual obligations — contracts.*
>
>   —Building bug-free O-O software: An Introduction to Design by Contract™
>    https://www.eiffel.com/values/design-by-contract/introduction/

In the mid 1980s, The French computer scientist Bertrand Meyer took
Hoare Logic, and shaped it into a practical discipline for software
engineering that he called “Design By Contract.”  Meyer was focused on

> software components—types and methods.  He realized that there's

Author: em dash is [as correct](https://pages.charlotte.edu/unccwrc/blog/2016/04/18/punctuation-em-dashes-vs-colons/) in this position as a colon.  The em dash implies a slightly looser connection, which was intentional.  There might be reasons to change it though… but if you want to suggest a change like this I think you should explain why.

special power in the Hoare triple that captures the intentions of a
function's author—the function's **contract**:

- The precondition describes which calls to a function should be
  considered valid.
- The postcondition omits anything that is purely an artifact of the

>   particular implementation, such as what happens when an invalid call

Reviewer 2: I think "artifact of the particular implementation" is broad and vague enough to confuse readers - specifically, make them wonder about irrelevant things here (like trapping behaviors). I think you just mean to say, "anything not specified in the contract", and I suppose I was wondering what counts as an artifact. Can we just say,

> The postcondition omits any consequences not guaranteed by the contract, such as what happens when an invalid call is made.

>   particular implementation, such as what happens when an invalid call

Author: Agreed about the language.

> The postcondition omits any consequences not guaranteed by the contract

That's almost tautological.  I'm really trying to say the postcondition specifies only the things you actually intend the function to do when invoked correctly.  It omits details such as—and I don't know how to say this economically for the book—the order of items in the 2nd part of the result of a partition algorithm that isn't stable, or the behavior when invoked incorrectly.

  function is not required to make any promises[^no-promises] in that case.

- If preconditions are statisfied but postconditions are not
  fulfilled, that's a bug in the callee, or in something it calls.

[^no-promises]: In fact, a function *shouldn't* make any promises in
  case of precondition violation, because then the caller has a right
  to call the function and expect the promised result: it's no longer
  a precondition violation.  There is one exception, especially in a
  safe-by-default language like Swift: all functions not explicitly
  labeled unsafe implicitly promise not to have arbitrary “undefined
  behavior” when their preconditions are violated.  But that's a
  blanket guarantee that you don't spell out in contracts.

And if you ever find yourself with something that's clearly a bug but
you can't decide which code to blame, that's a sign that a contract is
missing or incomplete.  A system that exposes these situations, where
everybody is playing by the rules but things still go wrong, is known
by the technical term “footgun.”

### Type Invariants

The other contribution of Meyer's Design by Contract was to apply the

> idea of “invariants” to user-defined types with private parts.  A

Reviewer 2: Does user-defined add anything here? Implementation defined types can have invariants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
idea of “invariants” to types with private parts.  A
```

Reviewer 2: Another place where "implementation" may have added confusion. Clearly std:: types have private parts, and they're not user-defined. Or, is the standard library a user (of the language) in this case? I don't think "private parts" is superfluous. But I do think "user-defined" is.

Author: But a type without visible private parts can still have an invariant.  I think I have to nix both of those qualifiers.

*class invariant* (or *type invariant*), is a condition that holds at

> a type's public API boundary—whenever a type interacts with its
> clients.  When we talk about an instance being “in a good state,” we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a type's public API boundary—whenever a client interacts with it.
When we talk about an instance being “in a good state,” we
```

Reviewer 2: We flow seamlessly here between using "caller" and "client". Consider making that connection explicitly.

mean that its type's invariants are satisfied.

> My favorite example is this type whose public interface is like an
> array of pairs, but stores the elements of those pairs in a pair of
> arrays.[^array-pairs]

Author: ```suggestion
For example, this type's public interface is like an
array of pairs, but it stores elements of those pairs separate
arrays.[^array-pairs]
```

    (xs[i], ys[i])
  }

  /// The length.
  public var count: Int { ys.count }

  /// Adds `e` to the end.
  public mutating func append(_ e: (X, Y)) {
    xs.append(e.0)
    ys.append(e.1)
  }
}
```

The invariant for this type is that the private arrays have the same
length.  It's important to remember that invariants only hold at a
type's public interface boundary and are routinely violated,
temporarily, durign a mutation.  For example, in `append`, we have to
grow one of the arrays first, which breaks the invariant until we've
done the other push_back.  That's not a problem because the arrays are
private—that “bad” state is *encapsulated* by the type, and
invisible to clients.  By the time we return from `append`, everything
is back in order.

Because we can control access to the visibility of “bad” states, there
is a formula for upholding a type invariant.  We

- make stored properties `private` or `private(set)`
- establish the invariant in the type's `init` method(s), and
- in `mutating` methods and in the mutation clauses of subscripts
  and computed properties, ensure the invariant is intact:
  - before returning to the caller
  - before passing `self` as a parameter

>   - before calling a non-private method or subscript—or accessing a non-private computed property—of `self`.

Reviewer 2: These are obviously stated in Swift-specific terminology. I wonder if some acknowledgement that other languages have equivalent constructs would be useful. Related: `private(set)` is mostly meaningless to a non-Swift programmer, and I wonder if it's adding any real value here. I assume it was added for completeness, but that completeness might be coming at the expense of clarity for users of other languages.

Author: > I wonder if some acknowledgement that other languages have equivalent constructs would be useful.

Good question.  But this will come up again, and I don't think we want to repeat it throughout the book.  I suggest you look at the intro chapter and see if there's an appropriate way to express what you mean that fits.  If not, maybe it's not that important.

Yes, `private(set)` is for completeness; we are giving a complete list of rules.  

Swift isn't the end.  IMO we are going to have to announce a Rust version of this book very shortly after it comes out.

Reviewer 2: >  I suggest you look at the intro chapter

Good suggestion - can do.

> Non-mutating operations can't disturb the invariant, and any mutating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Non-mutating operations can't break the invariant, and any mutating
```

We've now used quite a few terms to express the idea of an invariant in the "off" state.
- does not hold (implied by the use of "holds", above)
- unsatisfied (implied by the use of "satisfied", above)
- violated
- breaks
- disturbed

Unless the diverse vocabulary is adding something, I'd suggest using at most two of these more consistently.

operation that only uses the type's public API trivially upholds the
invariant.

#### How To Choose a Type Invariant

Often, you have a choice about how strong to make your type's
invariant.  For example, in `PairArray`, we could have chosen the
invariant `x.count <= y.s.count`.  We call that a *weaker* invariant
because it allows many more internal states.

Let's assume that there's some method that can create a condition
where `x.count < y.count`:

```swift
  /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
  ///
  /// - Precondition: `xs.count <= ys.count`.
  init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) { (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys) }
```

[Note: when sequences of unequal length are `zip`ped, the result
has the length of the shorter sequence.]

Now let's see what happens to the rest of the implementation.  Most of

> it is unchanged, but in the `append` method, we now need to account

Reviewer 2: > Most of it is unchanged

I assume this implies that the only change is below, in `append`. If that's true, we need to change `count` above (line 283) to return `xs.count`, right? If we're not truncating `ys` in `init` (which, by the way, why?) I think we have to use `xs` as the definitive length for the array.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can just change the implementation as I suggested, and remove the note altogether? Seems cleaner.

for these new internal states.  Here's one way we could do it:

```swift
  /// Adds `e` to the end.
  public mutating func append(_ e: (X, Y)) {
    ys.removeRange(xs.count...) // <=====
    xs.append(e.0)
    ys.append(e.1)
  }
```

Also, the `count` property now reports the wrong length; it needs to
return `xs.count` instead of `ys.count`.

> So a weaker invariant complicated the implementation and made it more
> fragile. In this case, only two adjustments were needed, but in

Reviewer 2: The use of "So" here implies this is always the case, but that's not true. Sometimes a weaker invariant can simplify the implementation, no? And I feel like there are cases where it might also make the implementation less fragile, though I'm less confident about that claim.

```suggestion
In this case, a weaker invariant complicated the implementation and made it more
fragile. Here, only two adjustments were needed, but in
```

principle it could be many more. Maintaining a stronger invariant
is better.  There are two simple approaches:

- We can strengthen the precondition of the new `init` method:

  ```swift
    /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
    ///
    /// - Precondition: `xs.count == ys.count`.
    init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) { (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys) }
  ```

> - Or we can lift the precondition entirely and normalize the internal

Author: I don't know why, but two syllables feels like too much.  How about this?

```suggestion
- Or we can scrap the precondition entirely and normalize the internal
```

> - Or we can lift the precondition entirely and normalize the internal

Author: going with "remove;" it's less esoteric.

  representation upon construction:

  ```swift
    /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
    init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) {
      (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys)
      let l = Swift.min(xs.count, ys.count)
      self.xs.removeRange(l...)
      self.ys.removeRange(l...)
    }
  ```

The latter approach is better, as it results in a simpler and
less-fragile public API.

### It's Documentation

Looking back at Meyers' definition, you might notice he says contracts
are “precisely defined specifications,” which is just a fancy word for
documentation. Like it or not, if you're going to be in the
correctness game, you need documentation.  Undocumented software is

> neither correct nor incorrect; it does something, but does it do the

Reviewer 2: I think this is too strong a claim (and too fundamental to the BC philosophy) to make in such a cheeky (for lack of a better term) tone. "Like it or not" seems to take an adversarial stance - assuming the reader is anti-documentation, which is a bit off-putting. And even if they are, I worry this tone would make them subconsciously dig in their heels. 

I also think that this deserves an example - perhaps even a callback to the decision space around the `PairArray` API - so we can show the reader firsthand that evaluating the correctness of an undocumented component is an impossible task. 

I appreciate this is general feedback without a concrete suggestion - let me know if you want to workshop this.

Author: I don't know what claim you're saying is too strong, or what you think I should say instead.

I agree with your criticism of the tone.  As for examples, I don't understand how anyone can demonstrate that evaluating correctness is impossible without documentation.  Where would you even start in trying to evaluate correctness?  If we write the example without docs that would be the first thing we'd confront.

compile time, such as Dafny and Lean 4, but we do not think they are
practical tools for programming at scale.

```swift
struct MyArray<T> {
  ...

  // Returns the `i`th element.
  @requires(i >= 0 && i < self.count)
  fun getNth(i: Integer): T

  ...
}
```

The idea started with Bertrand Meyer's own Eiffel language, and was
picked up by many others, including D, Scala, Kotlin, and
Clojure. Other languages, like Rust and Python, have contract
libraries that provide a near-native contract programming experience.

If you use one of these languages, fantastic; *absolutely do* leverage
those features and libraries.  That can reduce the amount of pure
documentation you need to write and add automated contract checking at
runtime. But there are caveats:

1. **Contracts are fundamentally documentation**, even if they're
   expressed in code, so they must appear in the API descriptions
   consumed by client programmers. If you're using contract checking
   with automated documentation extraction tools make sure they expose
   the contract code along with the API.  If not, you need to repeat
   the complete contract in documentation.

> 2. Some contracts are better expressed in English than as code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Some contracts are better expressed in natural language than as code,
```

I'm curious what you think of this - though it's massively dominant in the industry, English is not the only language in which code and documentation are written.

Author: I agree with the spirit of the suggestion, but think I'd prefer this:

```suggestion
2. Some contracts are better expressed in human language than as code,
```

and necessary, but it has *benefits* beyond correctness and local
reasoning: it helps you improve your APIs and can even increase overall
development speed. But you'll only see those benefits if you document *as
you code*. If documentation is an afterthought, it can only ever be
experienced as overhead.

If you take this discipline seriously, you'll begin to notice that the
poorly designed or named components haven't been documented clearly
and concisely.  Sometimes that documentation is obviously unachievable
because the design simply has too many wrinkles.  In other cases
you'll find the design can be salvaged by driving it towards a simpler
contract. Improvements in development speed come from arriving at the
right design earlier, since a poor experience for readers of your
documentation becomes a “code smell.”

#### Use Documentation Comments

Contract documentation should always go in your code as comments,
because:

1. That puts the two things that should correspond—documentation and
   implementation—next to one another, so you can see when they don't
   match up. People sometimes complain that docs go out of date, but

>    that's kinda the point: without the ability to see that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   that's exactly the point: without the ability to see that
```

I agonized over this, because I like the original vibe, but ultimately I think the slang is more distracting than useful.

   inconsistency, there's no way to know that there's a bug.

2. Using comments makes it reasonable to combine the activities of

>    coding and documentation, which—believe it or not—are mutually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   coding and documentation, which are mutually
```

Again, I think this takes an adversarial tone that undermines the key point. We're building the universe from whole cloth here - we don't need to remind people of their bad habits/beliefs.

   supportive.

> 3. IDEs and documentation extractors recognize special three-slash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. IDEs and documentation extractors recognize special ///three-slash
```

  ///   manager of any other employee.
  public remove(_ e: EmployeeID)

  ...
}
```

Upholding invariants is the _entire purpose_ of access control, so use
`private` whenever you can!

#### The Power of Type Information

Everything you see in a function signature is implicitly part of the
function's contract. A function with a parameter of type
`EmployeeDatabase` has a precondition that the database upholds the
manager invariant, but it doesn't need to be stated explicitly; it's
enforced automatically by the compiler and the implementor of
`EmployeeDatabase`.  So static typing gives you a leg up on the
“document everything” project. If you were programming in a totally
dynamic language, like Javascript, or Python without type hints, you
have to put a lot more of that sort of information into the written
documentation.

#### Public And Private Invariants

Some invariants, such as the one documented for `EmployeeDatabase`
above, are exposed to users of the type, and thus should be in public
doc comments.  Others, like the invariant that the members of
`PairArray` have the same length, are purely part of its
implementation, and should be encoded in ordinary comments addressed

> privately to the implementor/maintainer of the code.  Note that you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
privately to the maintainer of the code.  Note that you
```

Nit: does implementer really add something here?

  public subscript(i: Int) -> T { ... }

  /// The length.
  public var length: Int { ... }
    .
    .
    .

  /// The number of elements that can be stored before storage is
  /// reallocated.
  private var capacity: Int { ... }
}
```

The method bodies are collapsed, because contracts are not about what
you put in your implementations.  Contracts are part of your
function's interface.

#### Basics

We've started by filling in the most basic part of every documentation
comment: a summary sentence fragment that minimally describes what the
thing *is* or *does*.

The first one

```swift
/// A resizable random-access collection of `T`s.
struct DynamicArray<T>
```

gives us the context we need to understand the methods: we're looking
at the declaration of dynamic array type that holds any number of Ts.

Now let's look at the documentation for the first method, called
"popLast."

```swift
  /// Removes and returns the last element.
  public mutating func popLast() -> T { ... }
```

As you can see from the summary, it removes and returns the last
element. Notice that the phrase “last element” is meaningful only
because we documented that `DynamicArray` is a collection, which we

> know is a sequence of elements.

Reviewer 2: Is it useful to say why we know it's a sequence of elements?

Reviewer 2: In a chapter so focused on _why_ we know the things we know, a phrase like "which we know" feels like it demands some justification. I wouldn't just rely on conventional usage of words. 

Does the Swift API guidelines say anything about how to use english words with widely-accepted definitions?

Author: @nickpdemarco [here](https://www.swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#use-terminology-well).  But you really should know that because you should have read them.  Go read them today please 😃 

@sean-parent I understand your complaint about “`Collection`.”  Maybe we should have called it “`MultipassSequence`”. With regard to your suggested documentation comment, does resizeable imply multipass?  I'm not sure. And regardless of what the best answer is for that name, `Collection` has an established meaning in Swift and it would be weird to bypass it.  So I think we should use `Collection` here.

W.R.T. Nick's original question,  we know it because `Collection` refines `Sequence` but I'm not still not sure it's worth saying that. 🤷

is something incidental that doesn't affect the program's meaning,
like updating a cache.

Notice also that we've omitted needless words: we didn't write, “the
last element of the `DynamicArray`,” because the type sets the context
for its methods.  Remember, every word the reader has to process takes
mental energy and contributes to perceived complexity.  We use all the
necessary words, but no more than necessary.

#### Details

Let's continue by spelling out the preconditions, postconditions,
and invariants of `popLast()`.

What are the preconditions for removing an element?  Obviously, there
needs to be an element to remove.

```swift
  /// Removes and returns the last element.
  ///
  /// - Precondition: `self` is non-empty.
  public mutating func popLast() -> T { ... }
```

A client of this method is considered to have a bug unless
the array has an element.  OK, so what about postconditions?

The postconditions are the effects of the method plus any returned
result.  If the preconditions are met, but the postconditions are not,
and the function does not report an error, we'd say the method has a
bug.  The bug could be in the documentation of course, *which is a

> part of the method*.

Reviewer 2: Is this the first place you say the documentation is part of the method? Clarifying this earlier may resolve some of the discussion between you and @camio regarding "contracts tell us where the bug is"

Reviewer 2: Yeah, as I said in that other thread I think it needs to be made earlier, right after we talk about relationships.

Author: OK, I moved the other instance earlier but I really think reminding the reader of that fact in a few words here is necessary.  Otherwise the sentence sounds like it's describing a way in which the bug might not be in the method.

  /// self[i])` is false for each `i` in `0 ..< length - 2`.
  ///
  ///     var a = [7, 9, 2, 7]
  ///     a.sort(areInIncreasingOrder: <)
  ///     print(a)     // prints [2, 7, 7, 9]
  ///
  /// - Precondition: `areInIncreasingOrder` is [a strict weak
  ///   ordering](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strict_weak_ordering)
  ///   over the elements of `self`.
  /// - Complexity: at most N log N comparisons, where N is the number
  ///   of elements.
  mutating func sort<T>(areInIncreasingOrder: (T, T)->Bool) { ... }
```

#### Letting Simplicity Drive Design

Let's take the complexity of the documentation as a hint that the API
could be improved and see where that leads.  If `sort` had been
written to work with `<=` as an argument, producing the same result,
the summary could have avoided swapping elements in the comparison and
negating the result:

```swift
/// Sorts the elements so that `areInOrder(self[i],
/// self[i+1])` is true for each `i` in `0 ..< length - 2`.
```

If we view a strict weak ordering as a generalization of what `<` does, the
corresponding generalization of `<=` is called a *total preorder*. [^equivalence-classes] In fact,

> we can convert any total preorder to a corresponding strict weak order

Reviewer 2: I see now you depend on this observation to make a later point. I think you might have signed yourself up for a slightly longer explanation of total preorders and strict weak orders.

> we can convert any total preorder to a corresponding strict weak order

Author: I thought I masterfully 🎺 covered what was needed with the footnote and was trying to avoid writing more.  Have you read [my article on this](http://web.archive.org/web/20120422220137/http://cpp-next.com/archive/2010/02/order-i-say/) (wait for it to load)?  Is there a particular part of that you think I should cover.

So while you may not reach a point where all bugs vanish, you will
have well-justified confidence in the correctness of your own work
while maintaining high productivity. Also, the discipline we'll
describe here of **programming by contract** removes uncertainty and
needless complexity from your code and from the process of coding.
That's a big part of why we say it's practical.

## Reasoning about correctness

How can you know whether your program is correct?  Validating
correctness seldom requires an elaborate formal proof—usually the sort
of everyday thinking that we do while programming suffices.

```swift
var names = [ "Sean", "Laura", "Dave", "Crusty" ]
names.sort()
print(names[3])
```

In the example above, how do we know that last line is OK? Our thought
process is something like this:

- We started with values in indices zero through three of `names`.
- sorting `names` rearranges elements without changing the set of valid indices.
- Therefore, in the last line, `names` still has an element at index `3`.

That's just an informal proof, and we use that kind of reasoning every
time we write a line of code. So, regular programming is on the same

> continuum as formally proving correctness.  We're going to explore the
> power that's available by moving toward the formal end of that
> spectrum to see how it enables Better Code.

Author: ```suggestion
continuum as formally proving correctness.  Let's explore how
injecting just a little more formalism into our process can enable
Better Code.
```

return `xs.count` instead of `ys.count`.

As is often the case, a weaker invariant complicated the implementation
and made it more fragile. Here, only two adjustments were needed, but in
principle it could be many more. Maintaining a stronger invariant
is better.  There are two simple approaches:

- We can strengthen the precondition of the new `init` method:

  ```swift
    /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
    ///
    /// - Precondition: `xs.count == ys.count`.
    init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) { (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys) }
  ```

- Or we can lift the precondition entirely and normalize the internal
  representation upon construction:

  ```swift
    /// An instance with the value of `zip(xs, ys)`.
    init(xs: [X], ys: [Y]) {
      (self.xs, self.ys) = (xs, ys)
      let l = Swift.min(xs.count, ys.count)
      self.xs.removeRange(l...)
      self.ys.removeRange(l...)
    }
  ```

The latter approach is better, as it results in a simpler and
less-fragile public API.

### It's Documentation

Looking back at Meyers' definition, you might notice he says contracts
are “precisely defined specifications,” which is just a fancy word for

> documentation. Like it or not, if you're going to be in the
> correctness game, you need documentation.  Undocumented software is

Author: ```suggestion
documentation. Undocumented software is
```

can have both: `PairArray` *also* has a public invariant that its
`count` is non-negative.  We'll get to why this particular invariant
is not explicitlty documented in a moment…

### Making It Tractable

If we're going to integrate documentation into our programming so
tightly, we need to make sure it's neither intrusive for the
maintainer to read nor burdensome for the author to write.  Ideally,
it should help both of them.

Now, not every contract is as simple as the ones we've shown so far,
but simplicity is a goal.  In fact, if you can't write a terse,
simple, but _complete_ contract for a component, there's a good chance
it's badly designed.  A classic example is the C library `realloc`
function, which does at least three different things—allocate, deallocate, and resize 
dynamic memory—all of which
need to be described. A better design would have separated these
functions.  So simple contracts are both easy to digest and easy to
write.

Let's look at another example. The methodology we'll be following here is based on the [Swift API
Design
Guidelines](https://www.swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/),
only slightly modified.

```swift

> /// A resizable random-access collection of `T`s.

Author: ```suggestion
/// A resizable random-access `Collection` of `T`s.
```

struct DynamicArray<T> {

  /// Removes and returns the last element.
  public mutating func popLast() -> T { ... }

  /// The `i`th element.
  public subscript(i: Int) -> T { ... }

  /// The length.
  public var length: Int { ... }
    .
    .
    .

  /// The number of elements that can be stored before storage is
  /// reallocated.
  private var capacity: Int { ... }
}
```

The method bodies are collapsed, because contracts are not about what
you put in your implementations.  Contracts are part of your
function's interface.

#### Basics

We've started by filling in the most basic part of every documentation
comment: a summary sentence fragment that minimally describes what the
thing *is* or *does*.

The first one

```swift

> /// A resizable random-access collection of `T`s.

Author: ```suggestion
/// A resizable random-access `Collection` of `T`s.
```

use access control, why we break programs into components like
functions, types, and modules, and why we try to keep them small.

## Components and Abstraction

Obviously, “knowing something about `sort`” is only possible and
relevant because `sort` is a separate component with its own name. If
we had inlined the sorting code directly into some other function,
we'd need to leave a comment for maintainers telling them
that the code was meant to sort. Even with the comment, to
fully understand the surrounding function, maintainers would
have to reason through the sorting algorithm's details.  
The comment itself is a code smell: every time we write a comment
that describes what the next piece of code is about to do, we should
ask whether that code can be its own function.

It's a common fallacy that factoring out a component only makes
sense if it's used more than once. The real criterion is whether you
can identify a unit of *abstraction*—the third ingredient of Better
Code.  If you can think of a simple and descriptive name for
something, that's usually a good indicator that there's an abstraction
waiting to be discovered.

> In fact, creating a component directly creates the opportunity for an
> additional use site: in testing.  The more code you test separately,

Author: ```suggestion
In fact, creating a component creates an immediate opportunity for
the code to be reused in tests.  The more code you test separately,
```

invariants. Component contracts build towers of abstraction. Local
correctness drives system-wide reliability. Whether you're building a
small utility or a large distributed system, contracts provide the
intellectual framework for managing complexity.

As you apply these ideas in your own work, remember that like any
powerful tool, contracts require practice to master. Start
small—document the declarations you're working on, think explicitly
about preconditions and postconditions, design your types to maintain
clear invariants. As these practices become natural, you'll find
yourself writing not just better code, but thinking more clearly about
the problems you're solving.

The investment in learning to program by contract pays dividends
throughout your career. It transforms how you read other people's
code, how you design your own components, and how you reason about
software systems. Most importantly, it provides a path toward the kind
of software craftsmanship where correctness, clarity, and
maintainability aren't happy accidents but inevitable outcomes of
disciplined practice.

Programming by contract isn't just about writing better software—it's

> about becoming a better programmer. The habits of thought and the

Reviewer: The conclusion is accepable, but I have two complaints:

1. It's longer than needed. If it could distill the key points of the chapter into a few paragraphs, that'd be great.
2. Some of the wording, like what I highlighted above, seems "fluffy" and a bit exaggerated. I'd suggest cutting down on this kind of statement.

Author: @camio I agree it's too long, fluffy, and exaggerated.  What did you highlight?

Reviewer: > Programming by contract isn't just about writing better software—it's
about becoming a better programmer

Author: Ugh, I still need to take care of this.
